Title: Artificial Intelligence 3E
URL: https://artint.info/3e/html/ArtInt3e.Ch1.S5.html
Snapshot Type: sanitized text

David L. Poole & Alan K. Mackworth

Artificial
Intelligence 3E

foundations of computational agents

- Home

- Index

- Contents

1.5 Agent Design Space

Agents acting in environments range in complexity from
thermostats to companies with multiple goals acting in competitive
environments. The ten dimensions of complexity in the design of
intelligent agents below are designed to help us understand
work that has been done, as well as the potential and limits of
AI. These dimensions may be considered
separately but must be combined to build an intelligent
agent. These dimensions define a design space for AI;
different points in this space are obtained by varying the values
on each dimension.

These dimensions give a coarse division of the
design space for intelligent agents. There are many other design
choices that must also be made
to build an intelligent agent.

1.5.1 Modularity

The first dimension is the level of modularity.

Modularity is the extent to which a system can be decomposed
into interacting modules that can be understood separately.

Modularity is important for reducing complexity. It is apparent in the
structure of the brain, serves as a foundation of computer science,
and is an important aspect of any large organization.

Modularity is typically expressed in terms of a hierarchical
decomposition.

In the modularity dimension , an agent’s structure is one of
the following:

•

flat – there is no organizational structure

•

modular – the system is decomposed into interacting
modules that can be understood on their own

•

hierarchical – the system is modular, and the modules themselves are decomposed
into simpler modules, each of which are hierarchical systems or
simple components.

In a flat or modular structure the agent typically reasons at a single
level of abstraction. In a hierarchical structure the agent
reasons at multiple levels of abstraction. The lower levels of the
hierarchy involve reasoning at a lower level of abstraction.

Example 1.6 .

The delivery robot at the highest level has to plan its day, making
sure it can deliver coffee on time, but still has time for longer
trips and cleaning a room.
At the lowest level, it needs to choose what motor controls to send to
its wheels,
and what movement its gripper should do. Even a task like picking up
a glass involves many precise movements that need to be
coordinated. Picking up a glass may be just one part of the larger
task of cleaning part of a room. Cleaning the room might be one task
that has to be scheduled into the robot’s day.

In a flat
representation, the agent chooses one level of abstraction and reasons at
that level. A modular representation would divide the task into a number of
subtasks that can be solved separately (e.g., pick up coffee, move from
the corridor to lab B, put down coffee). In a hierarchical representation, the agent will solve
these subtasks in a hierarchical way, until the task is reduced to simple
tasks such a sending an http request or making a particular motor control.

Example 1.7 .

A tutoring agent may have high-level teaching strategies, where it needs
to decide which topics are taught and in what order.
At a much lower level, it must design the
details of concrete examples and specific questions for a test. At
the lowest level it needs to combine words and lines in diagrams to
express the examples and questions. Students can also be treated as
learning in a hierarchical way, with detailed examples as well as higher-level
concepts.

Example 1.8 .

For the trading agent, consider the task of making all of the
arrangements and purchases for a custom holiday for a traveler. The agent
should be able to make bookings for flights that fit together. Only
when it knows where the traveller is staying and when, can it make
more detailed arrangements such as dinner and event reservations.

A hierarchical decomposition is important for reducing the complexity
of building an intelligent agent that acts in a complex environment. Large organizations
have a hierarchical organization so that the top-level decision makers
are not overwhelmed by details and do not have to micromanage all activities of the organization. Procedural abstraction and
object-oriented programming in computer science are designed to enable
simplification of a system by exploiting modularity and abstraction.
There is much evidence that biological systems are also hierarchical.

To explore
the other dimensions, initially ignore the hierarchical structure and
assume a flat representation. Ignoring hierarchical decomposition is
often fine for small or moderately sized tasks, as it is for simple
animals, small organizations, or small to moderately sized computer
programs. When tasks or systems become complex, some
hierarchical organization is required.

How to build hierarchically organized agents is discussed in
Section 2.2 .

1.5.2 Planning Horizon

The planning horizon dimension is how far ahead in time the agent plans. For
example, consider a dog as an agent.
When a dog is called to come, it should turn around to start running
in order to get a reward in the future. It does not act only to get an
immediate reward. Plausibly, a dog does not act for goals
arbitrarily far in the future (e.g., in a few months), whereas people do
(e.g., working hard now to get a holiday next year).

How far the agent “looks into the future” when deciding what to do
is called the planning horizon .
For completeness, let’s include
the non-planning case where the agent is not reasoning in time. The time
points considered by an agent when planning are called stages .

In the planning horizon dimension , an agent is one of the following:

•

A non-planning agent is an agent that does not consider the future when it decides
what to do or when time is not involved.

•

A finite horizon planner is an agent that looks for a
fixed finite number of stages. For example, a doctor may have to treat a
patient but may have time for a test and so there may be two
stages to plan for: a testing stage and a treatment stage. In the
simplest case, a greedy
or myopic agent only looks one time step ahead.

•

An indefinite horizon planner is an agent that looks
ahead some finite, but not predetermined, number of stages. For
example, an agent that must get to some location may not know
a priori how many steps it will take to get there, but, when
planning, it does not consider what it will do after it gets to the location.

•

An infinite horizon planner is an agent that
plans on going
on forever. This is often called a process . For example,
the stabilization module of a legged robot should go on forever; it
cannot stop when it has achieved stability, because the robot has
to keep from falling over.

The modules in a hierarchical decomposition may
have different horizons, as in the following example.

Example 1.9 .

For the delivery and helping agent, at the lowest level the module
that keeps the robot stable, safe, and attentive to requests may be on an infinite horizon,
assuming it is running forever. The task of delivering coffee to a particular
person may be an indefinite horizon problem. Planning for a fixed number of hours may be a finite horizon problem.

Example 1.10 .

In a tutoring agent , for some subtasks, a
finite horizon may be appropriate, such as in a fixed teach,
test, re-teach sequence. For other cases, there may be an indefinite
horizon where the system may not know at design time how many steps
it will take until the student has mastered some concept. It may
also be possible to model teaching as an ongoing process
of learning and testing with appropriate breaks, with no expectation
of the system finishing.

1.5.3 Representation

The representation dimension concerns how the world is described.

The different ways the world
could be are called states . A state of the world
specifies the
agent’s internal state (its belief state) and the
environment state.

At the simplest level, an agent can reason explicitly in terms of
individually identified states.

Example 1.11 .

A thermostat for a heater
may have two belief states: off and heating . The environment may have three
states: cold , comfortable , and hot . There are thus six states corresponding
to the different combinations of belief and environment states. These
states may not fully describe the world, but they are adequate to describe
what a thermostat should do. The thermostat should move to, or stay in,
heating if the environment is cold and move to, or stay in,
off if the environment is hot . If the
environment is comfortable , the thermostat should stay in its
current state. The thermostat agent turns or keeps the heater on in the
heating state and turns or keeps the heater off in the off state.

Instead of enumerating states, it is often easier to reason in terms
of features of the state or propositions that are true or false of the
state.
A state may be described in terms of
features , where a feature has a value
in each state [see Section 4.1 ].

Example 1.12 .

Consider designing an agent to diagnose electrical problems in the
home of Figure 1.6 . It may
have features for the position of each switch, the status of each
switch (whether it is working okay, whether it is shorted, or whether
it is broken), and whether each
light works. The feature p ⁢ o ⁢ s ⁢ i ⁢ t ⁢ i ⁢ o ⁢ n ⁢ _ ⁢ s 2 may be a feature that
has value u ⁢ p when switch s 2 is up and has value d ⁢ o ⁢ w ⁢ n when the
switch is down. The state of the home’s lighting may be
described in terms of values for each of these features. These
features depend on each other, but not in arbitrarily complex ways;
for example, whether a light is on may just depend on whether it is okay,
whether the switch is turned on, and whether there is electricity.

A proposition is a Boolean feature, which
means that its value is either t ⁢ r ⁢ u ⁢ e or f ⁢ a ⁢ l ⁢ s ⁢ e . Thirty propositions can encode 2 30 = 1 , 073 , 741 , 824 states. It may be easier to specify and reason with the
thirty propositions than with more than a billion states. Moreover, having
a compact representation of the states indicates understanding, because
it means that an agent has captured some regularities in the domain.

Example 1.13 .

Consider an agent that has to recognize digits. Suppose the agent observes a binary
image, a 28 × 28 grid of pixels, where each of the 28 2 = 784
grid points is either black or white. The action is to determine which of the
digits { 0 , … , 9 } is shown in the image. There are 2 784
different possible states of the image, and so 10 2 784 different
functions from the image state into the characters
{ a , … , z } . You cannot represent such functions in terms
of the state space. Instead, handwriting recognition systems define features of the image,
such as line segments, and define
the function from images to characters in terms of these
features. Modern implementations learn the features that are useful;
see Example 8.3 .

When describing a complex world, the features can depend on relations
and individuals . An
individual is also called a thing , an object ,
or an entity . A relation on a single individual is a property . There is a feature for each possible relationship
among the individuals.

Example 1.14 .

The agent that looks after a home in Example 1.12
could have the lights and switches as individuals, and
relations p ⁢ o ⁢ s ⁢ i ⁢ t ⁢ i ⁢ o ⁢ n and c ⁢ o ⁢ n ⁢ n ⁢ e ⁢ c ⁢ t ⁢ e ⁢ d ⁢ _ ⁢ t ⁢ o . Instead of the feature
p ⁢ o ⁢ s ⁢ i ⁢ t ⁢ i ⁢ o ⁢ n ⁢ _ ⁢ s 2 = u ⁢ p , it could use the relation p ⁢ o ⁢ s ⁢ i ⁢ t ⁢ i ⁢ o ⁢ n ⁢ ( s 2 , u ⁢ p ) . This
relation enables the agent to reason about all switches or for an
agent to have general knowledge
about switches that can be used when the agent encounters a switch.

Example 1.15 .

If an agent is enrolling
students in courses, there could be a feature that gives the grade of a
student in a course, for every student–course
pair where the student took the course. There would be a p ⁢ a ⁢ s ⁢ s ⁢ e ⁢ d feature for every student–course pair, which
depends on the g ⁢ r ⁢ a ⁢ d ⁢ e feature for that pair. It may be easier to
reason in terms of individual students, courses, and grades, and the relations
g ⁢ r ⁢ a ⁢ d ⁢ e and p ⁢ a ⁢ s ⁢ s ⁢ e ⁢ d . By defining how p ⁢ a ⁢ s ⁢ s ⁢ e ⁢ d depends on g ⁢ r ⁢ a ⁢ d ⁢ e
once, the agent can apply the definition for each student and course. Moreover, this can be
done before the agent knows which individuals exist, and so before it knows
any of the features.

The two-argument relation p ⁢ a ⁢ s ⁢ s ⁢ e ⁢ d , with 1000 students
and 100 courses,
can represent 1000 ∗ 100 = 100 , 000 propositions and so 2 100 , 000 states.

By reasoning in terms of relations and individuals, an agent can reason about whole classes of individuals without ever
enumerating the features or propositions, let alone the states. An
agent may have to reason about infinite sets of individuals, such as the set of all numbers or the set of all sentences. To reason
about an unbounded or infinite number of individuals, an agent cannot reason in terms of
states or features; it must reason at the relational level.

In the representation dimension , the agent reasons in terms of

•

states

•

features, or

•

individuals and relations (often called relational representations ).

Some of the frameworks will be developed in terms of states, some in
terms of features, and some in terms of individuals and relations.

Reasoning in terms of states is introduced in
Chapter 3 . Reasoning in terms of features is
introduced in Chapter 4 .
Relational reasoning is considered starting from
Chapter 15 .

1.5.4 Computational Limits

Sometimes an agent can decide on its best action quickly
enough for it to act.
Often there are computational resource limits that prevent an agent
from carrying out the best action. That is, the agent may not be able to find the best
action quickly enough within its memory limitations to act while that action is still the best thing
to do. For example, it may not be much use to take 10 minutes to
derive what was the best
thing to do 10 minutes ago, when the agent has to act
now . Often, instead, an agent
must trade off how long it takes to get a solution with how good
the solution is; it may be better to find a reasonable solution
quickly than to find a better solution later because the world will have
changed during the computation.

The computational limits dimension determines whether an agent has

•

perfect rationality , where an agent reasons about the
best action without taking into account its limited computational resources, or

•

bounded rationality , where an agent decides on the best
action that it can find given its computational limitations.

Computational resource limits include computation time, memory, and
numerical accuracy caused by computers not representing real numbers exactly.

An anytime algorithm is an
algorithm where the
solution quality improves with time. In particular, it is one that
can produce its current best solution at any time, but given more time
it could produce even better solutions. To ensure that the quality
does not decrease, the agent can store
the best solution found so far, and return that when asked for a
solution.
Although the solution quality may increase with time, waiting to act has a cost;
it may be better for an
agent to act before it has found what would be the best solution.

Example 1.16 .

The delivery robot cannot think for a long time about how to avoid a
person. There might be a best way to avoid the person and to achieve
its other goals, however it might take time to determine that optimal
path, and it might be better to act quickly and then recover from a non-optimal
action. In the simplest case, a robot could just stop if it encounters
a person, but even that is error prone as robots have momentum, so it
cannot stop immediately and people behind may run into it if it
stops suddenly.

Example 1.17 .

Even a tutoring agent that can act at longer scales than a robot sometimes has to
act quickly.
When a student has completed a task and wants a new task, the agent
needs to decide whether it should
assign the student the best task it
has found so far, or compute for longer, trying to find an
even better task. As the
student waits, they might become distracted, which might be worse than
giving them a non-optimal task. The computer can be planning the next
task when the student is working. Modern computers, as fast as they may be,
cannot find optimal solutions to difficult problems quickly.

Figure 1.7: Solution quality as a function of time for an anytime
algorithm. The meaning is described in Example 1.18

Example 1.18 .

Figure 1.7 shows how the computation time of an anytime
algorithm can affect the solution quality. The agent has to carry out
an action but can do some computation to decide what to do. The absolute solution
quality, had the action been carried out at time zero,
shown as the dashed line at the top, is
improving as the agent takes time to reason. However, there is a penalty associated with taking time
to act. In this figure, the penalty, shown as the dotted line
at the bottom, is negative and proportional to the time taken before the agent acts. These two values can be added to get the discounted quality,
the time-dependent value
of computation; this is the solid line in the middle of the graph. For
the example of Figure 1.7 , an agent
should compute for about 2.5 time units, and then act, at which point the discounted
quality achieves its maximum value. If the computation lasts
for longer than 4.3 time units, the resulting discounted solution quality is worse
than if the algorithm outputs the initial guess it can produce with
virtually no computation. It is typical that the solution
quality improves in jumps; when the current best solution changes,
there is a jump in the quality.
The penalty associated with
waiting is rarely a straight line; it is typically a function of
deadlines, which may not be known by the agent.

To take into account bounded rationality, an agent must decide whether
it should act or reason for longer.
This is
challenging because an agent typically does not know how much better
off it would be if it only spent a little bit more time reasoning. Moreover, the time spent thinking
about whether it should reason may detract from actually
reasoning about the domain.

1.5.5 Learning

In some cases, a designer of an agent may have a good model of
the agent and its environment. But often a designer does not have a
good model, and so an agent should use data from its past experiences
and other sources to help it decide what to do.

The learning dimension determines whether

•

knowledge is given , or

•

knowledge is learned (from prior knowledge and data or past experience).

Learning typically means finding the best model that fits the
data. Sometimes this is as simple as tuning a fixed set of parameters, but it can
also mean choosing the best representation out of a class of
representations. Learning is a huge field in itself but does not stand in
isolation from the rest of AI. There are many issues beyond fitting
data, including how to incorporate background
knowledge, what data to collect, how to represent the
data and the resulting representations, what learning biases are
appropriate, and how the learned knowledge can be used to affect how
the agent acts.

Learning is considered in Chapters 7 , 8 ,
10 , 13 , and 17 .

Example 1.19 .

A robot has a great deal to learn, such as
how slippery floors are as a function of their shininess,
where each person hangs out at different parts of the day, when they will
ask for coffee, and which actions result in the highest rewards.

Modern vision systems are trained to learn good features (such as lines and
textures) on millions if not billions of
images and videos. These features can be used to
recognize objects and for other tasks, even if there have been few
examples of the higher-level concepts. A robot might not have seen a
baby crawling on a highway, or a particular mug, but should be able
to deal with such situations.

Example 1.20 .

Learning is fundamental to diagnosis. It is through learning and science
that medical professionals understand the progression of diseases and how well
treatments work or do not work. Diagnosis is a challenging domain
for learning, because all patients are different, and each individual
doctor’s experience is only with a few patients with any particular
set of symptoms. Doctors also see a biased sample of the population;
those who come to see them usually have unusual or painful
symptoms. Drugs are not given to people randomly. You cannot learn
the effect of treatment by observation alone, but need a causal model
of the causes and effects; see Chapter 11 for
details on building causal models. To overcome the limitations of
learning from observations alone, drug companies spend billions of
dollars doing randomized controlled
trials in order to learn the efficacy of drugs.

1.5.6 Uncertainty

An agent could assume there is no uncertainty, or it could
take uncertainty in the domain into
consideration. Uncertainty is divided into two dimensions: one for
uncertainty from
sensing and one for uncertainty about the effects of
actions.

Sensing Uncertainty

In some cases,
an agent can observe the state of the world directly. For example, in some board
games or on a factory floor, an agent may know exactly the state of the world. In many other
cases, it may have some noisy perception of the state and the best
it can do is to have a probability distribution over the set of
possible states
based on what it perceives. For example, given a patient’s symptoms, a medical doctor may not
actually know which disease a patient has and may have only
a probability distribution over the diseases the patient may have.

The sensing uncertainty dimension concerns whether the agent can determine the state from
the stimuli:

•

Fully observable means the agent knows the state of
the world from the stimuli.

•

Partially observable means the agent does not
directly observe
the state of the world. This occurs when many possible
states can result in the same stimuli or when stimuli
are misleading.

Assuming the world is fully observable is a common simplifying
assumption to keep reasoning tractable.

Example 1.21 .

The delivery robot does not know
exactly where it is, or what else there is, based on its limited sensors. Looking
down a corridor does not provide enough information to know where it
is or who is behind the doors. Knowing where it was a second ago will
help determine where it is now, but even robots can get lost. It
may not know where the person who requested coffee is. When it
is introduced into a new environment, it may have much more uncertainty.

Example 1.22 .

The tutoring agent cannot
directly observe the knowledge of the student. All it has is some
sensing input, based on questions the student asks or does not
ask, facial expressions, distractedness, and
test results. Even test results are very noisy, as a mistake may be due to distraction or test anxiety instead of lack
of knowledge, and a correct answer might be due to a lucky guess
instead of real understanding.
Sometimes students make mistakes in testing situations they wouldn’t make at
other times.

Example 1.23 .

A trading agent does not know all
available options and their availability, but must find
out information that can become outdated quickly (e.g., if a hotel
becomes booked up). A travel agent does not know whether a flight will
be canceled or delayed, or whether the passenger’s luggage will be
lost. This uncertainty means that the agent must plan for the
unanticipated.

Effect Uncertainty

A model of the dynamics of the world is a model of how the
world changes as a result of actions, including the case of how it
changes if the action were to do nothing.
In some cases an agent knows the effects of its action. That is, given a state
and an action, the agent can accurately predict the state resulting from carrying out that action
in that state. For example, a software agent interacting with the file
system of a computer may be able to predict the effects of
deleting a file given the state of the file system. However, in many
cases, it is difficult to predict the effects of an action, and the
best an agent can do is to have a probability distribution over the
effects. For example, a teacher may not know the effects explaining a concept,
even if the state of the students is known. At the other extreme, if
the teacher has no inkling of the effect of its actions, there would be no
reason to choose one action over another.

The dynamics in the effect uncertainty dimension can be

•

deterministic when the state resulting from an action
is determined by an action and the prior state, or

•

stochastic when there is a probability
distribution over the resulting states.

Example 1.24 .

For the delivery robot, there can be uncertainty about the effects of an action, both at
the low level, say due to slippage of the wheels, or at the
high level because the agent might not know whether putting the coffee on
a person’s desk succeeded in delivering coffee to the person. This may
depend on the individual preferences of users.

Example 1.25 .

Even a trading agent does not know the effect of putting in a trade
order, such as booking a flight or a hotel room. These can become
unavailable at very short notice (consider two trading agents trying
to book the same room at the same time), or the price can vary.

The effect dimension only makes sense when the world is fully observable. If
the world is partially observable, a stochastic system can be modeled
as a deterministic system where the effect of an action depends on
unobserved features. It is a separate dimension because many of the
frameworks developed are for the fully observable, stochastic action case.

Planning with deterministic actions is considered in
Chapter 6 . Planning with stochastic actions is
considered in Chapter 12 .

1.5.7 Preference

Agents normally act to have better outcomes. The only reason
to choose one action over another is because the preferred action leads
to more desirable outcomes.

An agent may have a simple goal, which is a
proposition the agent wants to be true in a final state. For example, the
goal of getting Sam coffee means the agent wants to reach a state
where Sam has coffee. Other agents may have more complex
preferences. For example, a medical doctor may be expected to take
into account suffering, life expectancy, quality of life, monetary
costs (for the patient, the doctor, and society), and the ability to
justify decisions in case of a lawsuit. The
doctor must
trade these considerations off when they conflict, as they invariably do.

The preference dimension considers whether the agent has goals or
richer preferences:

•

A goal is either an
achievement goal , which is a proposition to be true in
some final state, or a maintenance goal , a proposition that must be true in all
visited states. For
example, the goals for a robot may be to deliver a cup of coffee and a
banana to Sam, and not to make a mess or hurt anyone.

•

Complex preferences involve trade-offs among the
desirability of
various outcomes, perhaps at different times.
An ordinal
preference is where only the ordering of the preferences is
important. A cardinal preference
is where the magnitude of the values
matters. For example,
an ordinal preference may be that Sam prefers cappuccino over black
coffee and prefers black coffee over tea. A cardinal preference may
give a trade-off between the wait time and the type of beverage, and
a mess versus taste trade-off, where Sam is prepared to put up with more
mess in the preparation of the coffee if the taste of the coffee is
exceptionally good.

Example 1.26 .

The delivery robot could be given goals, such as “deliver coffee to Chris
and make sure you always have power.” A more
complex goal may be to “clean up the lab, and put everything where
it belongs”, which can only be achieved to some degree. There can be complex preferences, such as
“deliver mail when it arrives and service coffee requests as soon
as possible, but it
is more important to deliver messages marked as urgent, and Chris
needs her coffee quickly when she asks for it.”

Example 1.27 .

For the diagnostic assistant, the goal may be as simple as “fix what is wrong,” but often
there are complex trade-offs involving costs, pain, life expectancy,
and preferences related
to the uncertainty that the diagnosis is correct and uncertainty
as to efficacy and side-effects of the treatment. There is also a
problem of whose preferences are to be taken into account; the
patient, the doctor, the payer, and society may all have different
preferences that must be reconciled.

Example 1.28 .

Although it may be possible for the tutoring agent to have a simple goal such, as to teach
some particular concept, it is more likely that complex
preferences must be taken into account. One reason is that,
with uncertainty, there may be no way to guarantee that the
student knows the concept being taught; any method that tries to maximize the
probability that the student knows a concept will be very annoying, because it will
repeatedly teach and test if there is a slight chance that the
student’s errors are due to
misunderstanding as opposed to fatigue or boredom.
More complex preferences would enable a trade-off among fully
teaching a concept, boring the student, the time taken, and the
amount of retesting. The student may also have a
preference for a teaching style that could be taken into
account. The student, the teacher, the parents, and future
employers may have different preferences. The student may have
incompatible preferences, for example, to not work hard and to get a
good mark. If the teacher is optimizing student evaluations, it
might both allow the student to not work hard, and also give good
marks. But that might undermine the goal of the student actually
learning something.

Example 1.29 .

For a trading agent,
preferences of users are typically in terms of functionality, not
components. For example, typical computer buyers have no idea of
what hardware to buy, but they know what functionality they want and
they also want the flexibility to be able to use new software features that
might not even exist yet. Similarly, in a travel domain, what activities
a user wants may depend on the location. Users also may want the
ability to participate in a local custom at their destination, even though they may
not know what those customs are. Even a simple path-finding
algorithm, such as Google Maps, which, at the time of writing, assumes all users’
preferences are to minimize travel time, could take into account
each individual user’s
preferences for diverse views or avoiding going too close to where
some particular relative lives.

Goals are considered in Chapters 3 and 6 .
Complex preferences are considered in Chapter 12 , and
the following chapters.

1.5.8 Number of Agents

An agent reasoning about what it should do in an environment where
it is the only agent is difficult enough. However, reasoning about
what to do when there are other agents who are also reasoning is much
more difficult. An agent in a multiagent setting may need to
reason strategically about other agents; the other agents may act to trick or manipulate
the agent or may be available to cooperate with the agent. With
multiple agents, it is often
optimal to act randomly because other agents can exploit deterministic
strategies. Even when the agents are cooperating and have a common
goal, the task of coordination and communication makes multiagent
reasoning more challenging. However, many domains contain
multiple agents and ignoring other agents’ strategic reasoning is
not always the best way for an agent to reason.

Taking the point of view of a single agent, the number of
agents dimension considers whether the agent explicitly considers
other agents:

•

Single agent reasoning means the agent
assumes that there are
no other agents in the environment or that all other agents
are part of nature , and so are non-purposive. This is a reasonable assumption if
there are no other agents or if the
other agents
are not going to change what they do based on the agent’s action.

•

Adversarial reasoning
considers another agent, where when one agent wins, the other loses. This
is sometimes called a two-player zero-sum game , as the
payoffs for the agents (e.g., + 1 for a win and − 1 for a loss) sum to zero. This is a
simpler case than allowing for arbitrary agents as there is no need to
cooperate or otherwise coordinate.

•

Multiple agent reasoning (or
multiagent reasoning ) means the agent takes the reasoning of
other agents into account. This occurs when there
are other
intelligent agents whose goals or preferences depend, in part, on what the
agent does or if the agent must communicate with other
agents. Agents may need to cooperate because coordinated actions can
result in outcomes that are better for all agents than each
agent considering the other agents as part of nature.

Reasoning in the presence of other agents is much more difficult if
the agents can act simultaneously or if the environment
is only partially observable. Multiagent systems are considered in
Chapter 14 . Note that the adversarial case is
separate as there are some methods that only work for that case.

Example 1.30 .

There can be multiple delivery robots, which can coordinate to deliver
coffee and parcels more efficiently. They can compete for power
outlets or for space to move. Only one might be able to go closest to the wall
when turning a corner. There may also be
children out to trick the robot, or pets that get in the way.

When automated vehicles
have to go on a highway, it may be much more efficient and safer for
them to travel in a coordinated manner, say one centimeter apart in a
convoy, than to travel three vehicle lengths apart. It is more
efficient because they can reduce wind drag, and many more vehicles can
fit on a highway. It is safer because the difference in speeds is small; if one vehicle
slams on its brakes or has engine problems, the car that might crash
into the back is going approximately
the same speed.

Example 1.31 .

A trading agent has to reason about other agents. In
commerce, prices are governed by supply and demand;
this means that it is important to reason about the other competing agents. This happens particularly in a world where many items are
sold by auction. Such reasoning becomes particularly difficult when
there are items that must complement each other, such as flights and
hotel bookings, and items that can substitute for each other, such as bus
transport or taxis. You don’t want to book the flights if there is
no accommodation, or book accommodation if there are no flights.

1.5.9 Interactivity

In deciding what an agent will
do, there are three aspects of computation that must be
distinguished: (1) the design-time
computation that goes into the design of the agent, carried out by the designer of the agent, not the agent itself;
(2) the computation that the agent can do before it observes the world and needs to act;
and (3) the computation that is done by the agent as it is acting.

The interactivity dimension considers whether the agent does

•

only offline
reasoning, where offline
reasoning is the computation
done by the agent before it has to act, and can include compilation,
learning or finding solutions from every state the agent could find
itself in; under this assumption, the agent can carry out simple fixed-cost computation while
acting, sometimes even just looking up the action in a table

•

significant online
reasoning, where online computation is the computation
done by the agent between observing the
environment and acting.

An agent acting in the world usually does not have the luxury of
having the world wait for it to consider the best
option. However, offline reasoning, where the agent can reason about
the best thing to do before having to act, is often a simplifying
assumption.
Online reasoning can
include long-range strategic reasoning as well as determining how to react in a
timely manner to the environment; see Chapter 2 .

Example 1.32 .

A delivery robot may be able to compute a plan for its day offline,
but then it needs to be able to adapt to changes, for example, when
someone wants coffee early or something urgent needs to be delivered. It
cannot plan for who it will meet and need to avoid in the
corridors. It either needs to be able to anticipate and plan for all
possible eventualities, or it needs to reason online when it finds
something unexpected.

Example 1.33 .

A tutoring agent can determine the general outline of what should be
taught offline. But then it needs to be able to react to unexpected
behavior online when it occurs. It is difficult to be able to
anticipate all eventualities, and might be easier to deal with them
online when it encounters them.

1.5.10 Interaction of the Dimensions

Figure 1.8
summarizes the dimensions of complexity.

Dimension
Values

Modularity
flat, modular, hierarchical

Planning horizon
non-planning, finite stage,

indefinite stage, infinite stage

Representation
states, features, relations

Computational limits
perfect rationality, bounded rationality

Learning
knowledge is given, knowledge is learned

Sensing uncertainty
fully observable, partially observable

Effect uncertainty
deterministic, stochastic

Preference
goals, complex preferences

Number of agents
single agent, adversaries, multiple agents

Interactivity
offline, online

Figure 1.8: Dimensions of complexity

In terms of the dimensions of complexity, the simplest case for the
robot is a
flat system, represented in terms of states, with no uncertainty, with achievement
goals, with no other agents, with given knowledge, and with perfect rationality. In
this case, with an indefinite stage planning horizon, the problem of
deciding what to do is reduced to the problem of finding a path in a
graph of states. This is explored in Chapter 3 .

In going beyond the simplest cases, these dimensions cannot be considered independently because
they interact in complex ways. Consider the following examples of the
interactions.

The representation dimension interacts with the modularity dimension in that some
modules in a hierarchy may be simple enough to reason in terms
of a finite set of states, whereas other levels of abstraction may
require reasoning about individuals and relations. For example, in a
delivery robot, a module that maintains balance may only have a few
states. A module that must prioritize the delivery of multiple
parcels to multiple people may have to reason about multiple
individuals (e.g., people, packages, and rooms) and the relations between
them. At a higher level, a module that reasons about the activity over
the day may only require a few states to cover the different phases of
the day (e.g., there might be three states of the robot: busy, available for
requests, and recharging).

The planning horizon interacts with the modularity dimension. For
example, at a high level, a dog may be
getting an immediate reward when it comes and gets a treat. At the
level of deciding where to place its paws, there may be a long time
until it gets the reward, and so at this level it may have to plan for
an indefinite stage.

Sensing uncertainty probably has the greatest impact on the complexity
of reasoning. It is much easier for an agent to reason when it knows
the state of the world than when it does not.

The uncertainty dimensions interact with the modularity
dimension: at one level in a hierarchy, an action
may be deterministic, whereas at another level, it may be
stochastic. As an example, consider the result of flying to a particular
overseas destination with a
companion you are trying to impress. At one
level you may know which country you are in. At a lower
level, you may be quite lost and not know where you are
on a map of the airport. At an even lower level responsible for maintaining balance, you
may know where you are: you are standing on the ground. At the highest
level, you may be very unsure whether you have impressed
your companion.

Preference models interact with uncertainty because an agent needs to
trade off between satisfying a very desirable
goal with low probability or a less desirable goal with a higher
probability. This issue is explored in Section 12.1 .

Multiple agents can also be used for modularity; one way to
design a single agent is to build multiple interacting agents that
share a common goal of making the higher-level agent act intelligently.
Some researchers, such as Minsky [ 1986 ] , argue that
intelligence is an emergent feature from a “society” of
unintelligent agents.

Learning is often cast in terms of learning with features – determining
which feature values best predict the value of another
feature. However, learning can also be carried out with individuals and
relations. Learning with hierarchies, sometimes called
deep learning , has enabled the learning of more complex concepts.
Much work has been done on learning in
partially observable domains, and learning with multiple agents.
Each of these is challenging in its own right without
considering interactions with multiple dimensions.

The interactivity dimension interacts with the planning horizon dimension in
that when the agent is reasoning and acting online, it also needs to
reason about the long-term horizon. The interactivity dimension also
interacts with the computational limits; even if an agent is reasoning
offline, it cannot take hundreds of years to compute an
answer. However, when it has to reason about what to do in, say, 1 / 10 of a
second, it needs to be concerned about the time taken to reason, and
the trade-off between thinking and acting.

Two of these dimensions, modularity and
bounded rationality, promise to make reasoning more efficient. Although
they make the formalism more complicated, breaking the system into
smaller components, and making the approximations needed to act in a
timely fashion and within memory limitations, should help build more
complex systems.

Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational Agents, Poole
& Mackworth

Copyright &copy; 2023, David L. Poole and Alan K. Mackworth .
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License .
