Title: Artificial Intelligence 3E
URL: https://artint.info/3e/html/ArtInt3e.Ch1.S4.html
Snapshot Type: sanitized text

David L. Poole & Alan K. Mackworth

Artificial
Intelligence 3E

foundations of computational agents

- Home

- Index

- Contents

1.4 Prototypical Applications

AI applications are widespread and diverse and include medical diagnosis, scheduling
factory processes, robots for hazardous environments, game playing,
autonomous cars, natural language translation systems, choosing
advertisements, personal assistants, and
tutoring agents. Rather than treating each application
separately, we abstract the essential features of such applications
to better understand the
principles behind intelligent reasoning and action.

Five main application domains are developed
in examples throughout the book. Although the particular
examples presented are simple – otherwise they would not fit into
the book – the application domains are representative of the range
of domains in which AI techniques can be, and are being, used.

1.4.1 An Autonomous Delivery and Helping Robot

Imagine a robot with wheels and the ability to pick up, put
down and manipulate objects. It has sensing capabilities allowing it to recognize objects and to avoid
obstacles. It can be given orders in natural language and obey them,
making reasonable choices about what to do when its goals
conflict. Such a robot could
deliver packages or coffee in an office environment, clean a
home and put things in their appropriate place, or help caregivers in a
hospital. Embedded in a
wheelchair, it could help disabled people. It should be useful as well as
safe.

In terms of the black-box characterization of an agent in Figure 1.4 ,
the autonomous delivery robot has as inputs:

•

prior knowledge, provided by the agent designer, about the agent’s capabilities, what objects it may encounter and
have to differentiate,
what requests mean, and perhaps about its
environment, such as a map

•

past experience obtained while acting, for instance, about the
effects of its actions (and – hopefully limited – experiences of breaking objects), what objects are common in the world, and what requests to expect at different times of
the day

•

goals in terms of what it should deliver and when, as well as
preferences specifying trade-offs, such as when it must forgo one goal to
pursue another, or the trade-off between acting quickly and acting
safely

•

stimuli about its environment from observations from input
devices such as
cameras, sonar, touch, sound, laser range finders, or keyboards as
well as stimuli such as the agent being forcibly moved or crashing.

The robot’s outputs are motor controls specifying how its
wheels should turn, where its limbs should move, and what it should do
with its grippers. Other outputs may include speech and a video display.

Figure 1.5: A typical laboratory environment for the delivery robot. This shows the locations of the
doors and which way they open.

Example 1.3 .

Figure 1.5 depicts a typical laboratory environment
for a delivery robot. This environment consists of four laboratories
and many offices. In our examples, the robot
can only push doors, and the directions of the doors in the diagram
reflect the directions in which the robot can travel. Rooms require keys and those keys can be obtained from various
sources. The robot must deliver parcels, beverages, and dishes from room to
room. The environment also contains a stairway that is potentially hazardous
to the robot.

1.4.2 A Diagnostic Assistant

A diagnostic assistant is intended to
advise a human about some particular system such as a medical
patient, the electrical system in a home, or an automobile. The diagnostic assistant should advise about potential
underlying faults or diseases, what tests to carry out, and what
treatment to prescribe. To give such advice, the
assistant requires a model of the system, including knowledge of
potential causes,
available tests, available treatments, and observations of the system (which are often called symptoms ).

To be useful, the diagnostic
assistant must provide added value, be easy for a human to use, and
not be
more trouble than it is worth. A
diagnostic assistant connected to the Internet can draw on expertise from throughout the world,
and its actions can be based on the most up-to-date research. However, it
must be able to justify why the suggested diagnoses or actions are
appropriate. Humans are, and should be, suspicious of computer systems
that are opaque and impenetrable. When humans are responsible for what they
do, even if their actions are based on a computer system’s advice, the
system needs to convince the human that the suggested actions are defensible.

Figure 1.6: An electrical environment for the diagnostic assistant

Example 1.4 .

Figure 1.6 shows an electrical distribution
system in
a home. In this home, power comes into the home through circuit
breakers and then it goes to power outlets or to lights through light
switches. For example, light l 1 is on if there is power coming into
the home, if circuit breaker c ⁢ b 1 is o ⁢ n , and if switches s 1
and s 2 are either both up or both down. This is the sort of model
that someone may have of the electrical power in the
home, which they could use to determine what is wrong given
evidence about the position of the switches and which lights are on
and which are off. The diagnostic assistant is there to help a
resident or an electrician troubleshoot electrical problems.

In terms of the black-box definition of an agent in Figure 1.4 ,
the diagnostic assistant has as inputs:

•

prior knowledge, such as
how switches and lights normally work, how diseases or malfunctions manifest
themselves, what information tests provide, the effects of
repairs or treatments, and how to find out information

•

past experience, in terms of data of previous cases that include
the effects of repairs or treatments, the prevalence of faults or
diseases, the prevalence
of symptoms for these faults or diseases, and the accuracy of
tests

•

goals of fixing the device or preferences
between repairing or replacing components, or a patient’s
preferences between living longer or reducing pain

•

stimuli that are observations of symptoms of a device or patient.

The output of the diagnostic assistant is in terms of recommendations
of treatments and tests, along with a rationale for its recommendations.

1.4.3 A Tutoring Agent

A tutoring agent
tutors students in some domain of study. The environment of the agent
includes students who interact through a computer or tablet interface,
and perhaps the students’ parents and teachers.

Example 1.5 .

Consider a tutoring agent to teach elementary physics, such as
mechanics, that interacts with a student. In order to successfully
tutor a student, the agent needs to be able to solve problems in the physics
domain, determine the student’s knowledge and misunderstanding
based on interacting with them, and converse using natural
language, mathematics, and diagrams.

In terms of the black-box definition of an agent in Figure 1.4 ,
a tutoring agent has the following as inputs:

•

prior knowledge, provided by the agent designer, about the
subject matter being taught,
teaching strategies, possible student errors and misconceptions.

•

past experience, which the tutoring agent has acquired
by interacting with students, such as, what errors students make, how many
examples and problems it takes various students to learn various
topics, and what students forget; this
can be information about students in general as well as about a particular student.

•

preferences about the importance of each topic, the level
of achievement of the student that is desired, and the importance
given to student motivation and engagement; there are often complex trade-offs among these.

•

stimuli include observations of a student’s test results and observations of the
student’s interaction (or
non-interaction) with
the agent; students can also ask questions
or request help on new examples and problems.

The actions of the tutoring agent include presenting the theory and worked-out examples, proposing suitable problems, providing help and feedback on a student’s solution, asking
the student questions, answering their questions, and producing
reports for parents and teachers.

1.4.4 A Trading Agent

A trading agent is like a robot, but instead of
interacting with a physical environment, it interacts with an
information environment. Its task is to procure goods and services for
a user. It must be able to be told the needs of a user, and it must interact with sellers (e.g., on the Web). The simplest trading
agent involves proxy bidding for a user on an auction site, where the system will keep
bidding until the user’s price limit is reached. A more complicated
trading agent will buy multiple complementary items, like booking a flight, a
hotel, and a
rental car that fit together, in addition to trading off competing
preferences of the user.
Web services provide
tools on the Web designed to be combined by trading agents.
Another example of a trading agent is one that monitors
how much food and groceries are in a household, monitors the prices,
and orders goods before they are needed, while trying to keep costs to a minimum.

In terms of the black-box definition of an agent in Figure 1.4 ,
the trading agent has as inputs:

•

prior knowledge about types of goods and services, selling
practices, and how auctions work

•

past experience about where is the best place
to look for specials, how prices vary with time in an auction,
and when specials tend to turn up

•

preferences in terms of what the user wants and how to trade off
competing goals

•

stimuli including observations about what items are available, their price, and, perhaps, how long they are available.

The output of the trading agent is either a recommendation the user
can accept or reject, or an actual purchase.

Because of the personalized nature of the trading agent, it should be
able to do better than a generic purchaser that, for example, only offers
packaged tours.

1.4.5 Smart Home

A smart home is a home that looks after itself and its
inhabitants. It can be seen as a mix of the other applications.

A
smart home is an inside-out robot. It has physical sensors and
actuators. It should be able to sense where people, pets, and objects
are. It should be able to adjust lighting, sound, heat, etc., to suit
the needs of its occupants, while reducing costs and minimizing
environmental impacts. A smart home will not only have fixed sensors
and actuators, but will be combined with mobile robots, and other
actuators, such as arms on the kitchen walls to help with cooking, cleaning, and
finding ingredients.

A purchaser of a smart home may expect it to be able to clean floors,
dishes, and
clothes and to put things where
they are kept. It is easy to clean a floor with the assumption that
everything small on the floor is garbage. It is much more difficult to
know which of the small items are precious toys and which are junk
that should be discarded, and this depends on the individual
inhabitants and their age. Each person may have their own
categorization of objects and where they are expected to be kept,
which forces a smart home to adapt to the inhabitants.

A smart home also must act as a diagnostician. When something goes
wrong, it should be able to determine what is the problem and fix
it. It should also be able to observe the inhabitants and determine if
there is something wrong, such as someone has been injured or
there is a burglary.

Sometimes a smart home needs to act as a tutoring agent. It may have
to teach the occupants how the appliances work, and how to interact with the
home (e.g., what should an person expect to happen when they put their coffee cup on the vacuum cleaner).
In order to do this, it
has to take into account the knowledge and level of understanding
of the person.

A smart home may also need to act as a purchasing agent. The home should notice when items, such as toilet paper,
soap, or essential foodstuffs, are running low and order more of them. Given a
decision about what food each inhabitant wants, it should make sure the
ingredients are in stock. It might even need to decide when
inessential items, such as junk food, should be kept in stock. It also
might need to decide when to discard perishable items, without
creating too much waste or putting people’s health at risk.

A smart home would include energy management. For example, with solar energy
providing power during daylight hours, it could determine whether
to store the energy locally or buy and sell energy on the smart
grid. It could manage appliances to minimize the cost of energy, such as
washing clothes when water and electricity are cheaper.

Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational Agents, Poole
& Mackworth

Copyright &copy; 2023, David L. Poole and Alan K. Mackworth .
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License .
