Title: Artificial Intelligence 3E
URL: https://artint.info/3e/html/ArtInt3e.Ch1.S2.html
Snapshot Type: sanitized text

David L. Poole & Alan K. Mackworth

Artificial
Intelligence 3E

foundations of computational agents

- Home

- Index

- Contents

1.2 A Brief History of Artificial Intelligence

Throughout human history, people have used technology to model
themselves.
There is evidence of this from ancient China, Egypt, and Greece, bearing
witness to the universality of this activity. Each new technology has,
in its turn,
been exploited to build intelligent agents or models of mind. Clockwork,
hydraulics, telephone switching systems, holograms, analog computers, and
digital computers have all been proposed both as technological metaphors
for intelligence and as mechanisms for modeling mind.

Hobbes (1588–1679), who has been described by
Haugeland [ 1985 , p. 85] as the “Grandfather of AI,” espoused the position that thinking was symbolic reasoning, like
talking out loud or working out an answer with pen and paper.
The idea of symbolic reasoning was further developed by
Descartes (1596–1650), Pascal (1623–1662), Spinoza (1632–1677),
Leibniz (1646–1716),
and others who were pioneers in the European philosophy of mind.

The idea of symbolic operations became more concrete with the
development of computers. Babbage
(1792–1871) designed the first general-purpose computer, the
Analytical Engine . Leonardo Torres y Quevedo build a chess
playing machine based on similar ideas in 1911
[Randell, 1982 ] . In the early part of the twentieth century, there was much
work done on understanding computation. Several models of
computation were proposed, including the
Turing machine by Alan Turing (1912–1954), a theoretical
machine that writes symbols on an infinitely long tape, and the
lambda calculus of Church (1903–1995), which is a
mathematical formalism for
rewriting formulas. It can be shown that these very different formalisms are
equivalent in that any function computable by one is computable by
the others. This leads to the Church–Turing thesis :

Any effectively computable function can be
carried out on a Turing machine (and so also in the lambda calculus or
any of the other equivalent formalisms).

Effectively computable means following well-defined
operations. In Turing’s day, “computers” were people who followed
well-defined steps; computers as known today did not
exist. This thesis says that all computation can be carried out on a
Turing machine or one of the other equivalent computational machines.
The Church–Turing thesis cannot be proved but it is a hypothesis that
has stood the test of time. No one has built a machine that has carried
out computation that cannot be computed by a Turing machine. There is
no evidence that people can compute functions that are not Turing
computable.
This provides an argument that
computation is more than just a metaphor for intelligence; reasoning
is computation and computation can be carried out by a
computer.

Some of the first applications of
computers were AI programs. Samuel [ 1959 ] built a
checkers program in 1952 and implemented a program that learns
to play checkers in the late 1950s. His program beat the Connecticut
state checkers champion in 1961. Wang [ 1960 ] implemented a program
that proved every logic theorem (nearly 400) in Principia Mathematica [Whitehead and Russell, 1925, 1927 ] .
Newell and Simon [ 1956 ] built a program, Logic Theorist , that discovers proofs in
propositional logic.

In parallel, there was also much work on
neural networks learning inspired by how neurons work.
McCulloch and Pitts [ 1943 ] showed how a simple thresholding “formal
neuron” could be the basis for a Turing-complete machine.
Learning for artificial neural networks was first described by
Minsky [ 1952 ] . One of the early significant works was the
perceptron of Rosenblatt [ 1958 ] . The work on neural networks
became less prominent for a number of years after the 1968 book by
Minsky and Papert [ 1988 ] , which argued that the representations
learned were inadequate for intelligent action. Many
technical foundations for neural networks were laid in the 1980s and 1990s
[Rumelhart et al., 1986 ; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997 ; LeCun et al., 1998a ] .
Widespread adoption followed the success by
Krizhevsky et al. [ 2012 ] for ImageNet
[Deng et al., 2009 ] , a
dataset of over 3 million images labelled with over 5000 categories.
Subsequent major advances include the introduction of
generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014 ]
and transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017 ] .
Neural networks in various forms are now the state of the art for predictive models for
large perceptual datasets, including images,
video, and speech, as well as some tasks for text. They are also used
for generative AI , to generate images,
text, code, molecules, and other structured output.
See Chapter 8 .

Neural
networks are one of many machine learning tools used for making
predictions from data in modern
applications. Other methods have been developed though the years,
including decision trees
[Breiman et al., 1984 ; Quinlan, 1993 ] and
logistic regression , introduced by Verhulst in 1832 [Cramer, 2002 ] . These
have diverse applications in many areas of science. Combining these
algorithms leads to the state-of-the-art gradient-boosted trees
[Friedman, 2001 ; Chen and Guestrin, 2016 ] , which
demonstrates the close interconnections between statistics and
machine learning.

While useful, making predictions is not sufficient to determine what
an agent should do; an agent also needs to plan. Planning in AI was
initially based on deterministic actions. Fikes and Nilsson [ 1971 ]
used deterministic actions to control a mobile robot.
Planning under uncertainty has a long history.
Markov decision processes (MDPs) , the
foundation for much of planning under uncertainty, and
dynamic programming , a general way to solve them, were invented by
Bellman [ 1957 ] . These were extended into
decision-theoretic planning in the 1990’s
[Boutilier et al., 1999 ] . Decision-theoretic planning with learning
is called reinforcement learning . The first reinforcement learning
programs were due to Andreae [ 1963 ] and
Michie [ 1963 ] . Major advances came with the inventions of
temporal-difference learning [Sutton, 1988 ] and
Q -learning [Watkins and Dayan, 1992 ] . Work in reinforcement learning has
exploded, including superhuman performance in chess, Go and other
games [Silver et al., 2017 ] .

Planning requires representations. The need for representations was
recognized early.

A computer program capable of acting intelligently in the world must
have a general representation of the world in terms of which its
inputs are interpreted. Designing such a program requires commitments
about what knowledge is and how it is obtained. …More specifically, we want a computer program that decides
what to do by inferring in a formal language that a certain strategy
will achieve its assigned goal. This requires formalizing concepts of
causality, ability, and knowledge.

– McCarthy and Hayes [ 1969 ]

Many of the early
representations were ad hoc, such as frames
[Minsky, 1975 ] , like the schemas of
Kant [ 1787 ] , Bartlett [ 1932 ] , and Piaget [ 1953 ] .
Later representations were based on logic [Kowalski, 1979 ] , with knowledge being defined
in logic and efficient inference. This
resulted in languages such as
Prolog [Kowalski, 1988 ; Colmerauer and Roussel, 1996 ] .

Probabilities were eschewed in AI, because of the number of parameters
required, until the breakthrough of Bayesian networks
( belief networks ) and
graphical models [Pearl, 1988 ] , which exploit conditional
independence, and form a basis for modeling causality .
Combining first-order logic and probability is the topic of
statistical relational AI [De Raedt et al., 2016 ] .

There has been a continual tension between how much knowledge is
learned and how much is provided by human experts or is
innate to an agent. It has long been
recognized that learning is needed, and it is known that learning
cannot be achieved with data alone .
During the 1970s and 1980s,
expert systems came to prominence, where the aim was to
capture the knowledge of an expert in some domain so that a computer
could carry out expert tasks. DENDRAL
[Buchanan and Feigenbaum, 1978 ] , developed from 1965 to 1983 in the field of
organic chemistry, proposed plausible structures for new organic
compounds. MYCIN [Buchanan and Shortliffe, 1984 ] , developed from 1972 to 1980,
diagnosed infectious diseases of the blood, prescribed antimicrobial
therapy, and explained its reasoning.

An alternative approach, de-emphasizing explicit knowledge
representations, emphasized situated
embodied agents
[Brooks, 1990 ; Mackworth, 2009 ] . The hypothesis is that intelligence
emerges, in evolution and individual development, through ongoing
interaction and coupling with a real environment.

During the 1960s and 1970s, natural
language understanding systems were developed for limited domains. For example, the
STUDENT program of Bobrow [ 1967 ] could solve
high-school algebra tasks expressed in natural
language. Winograd ’s [ 1972 ] SHRDLU system could, using
restricted natural language, discuss and carry out tasks in a
simulated blocks world. CHAT-80 [Warren and Pereira, 1982 ] could answer geographical questions
placed to it in natural language.
Figure 1.3 shows some questions that CHAT-80 answered based on a database of facts about countries, rivers, and so on. These systems could only reason in very limited domains
using restricted vocabulary and sentence structure. Interestingly,
IBM’s Watson , which beat the world champion in the TV game
show Jeopardy! in 2011, used a
technique similar to CHAT-80 [Lally et al., 2012 ] for understanding questions; see Section 15.7 .

Does Afghanistan border China?
What is the capital of Upper_Volta?
Which country’s capital is London?
Which is the largest African country?
How large is the smallest American country?
What is the ocean that borders African countries
and that borders Asian countries?
What are the capitals of the countries bordering the Baltic?
How many countries does the Danube flow through?
What is the total area of countries south of the Equator
and not in Australasia?
What is the average area of the countries in each continent?
Is there more than one country in each continent?
What are the countries from which a river flows into the Black_Sea?
What are the continents no country in which contains more than
two cities whose population exceeds 1 million?
Which country bordering the Mediterranean borders a country
that is bordered by a country whose population exceeds
the population of India?
Which countries with a population exceeding 10 million border
the Atlantic?

Figure 1.3: Some questions CHAT-80 could answer

In applications using language in the wild, such as speech recognition and translation
in phones, many technologies are combined, including neural networks; see
Chapter 8 . Large language
models , trained on huge datasets, can be used to predict the next
word in a text, enabling predictive spelling and the creation of new text.

1.2.1 Relationship to Other Disciplines

AI is a very young discipline. Other disciplines as diverse as
philosophy, neurobiology, evolutionary biology, psychology, economics,
political science, sociology, anthropology, control engineering, statistics, and
many more have been studying aspects of intelligence much longer.

The science of AI could be described as “synthetic
psychology,” “experimental
philosophy,” or “computational
epistemology” – epistemology is the study
of knowledge. AI can be seen as a way to study the
nature of knowledge and intelligence, but with more powerful
experimental tools than were previously available. Instead of being able
to observe only the external behavior of intelligent systems, as
philosophy, psychology, economics, and sociology have traditionally
been able to do, AI researchers experiment with executable models of
intelligent behavior. Most important, such models are open to
inspection, redesign, and experimentation in a complete and rigorous
way. Modern computers provide a way to construct the models about which
philosophers have only been able to theorize. AI researchers can experiment with these
models as opposed to just discussing their abstract properties. AI
theories can be empirically grounded in implementations.
Sometimes simple agents exhibit complex
behavior, and sometimes sophisticated, theoretically motivated algorithms don’t work in
real-world domains, which would not be known without implementing the agents.

It is instructive to consider an analogy between the development of
flying machines over the past few centuries and
the development of thinking machines over the past few decades.
There are several ways to understand flying. One is
to dissect known flying animals and hypothesize their common structural
features as necessary fundamental characteristics of any flying agent.
With this method, an examination of birds, bats, and insects would suggest
that flying involves the flapping of wings made of some structure
covered with feathers or a membrane. Furthermore, the hypothesis could
be tested by strapping feathers to one’s arms, flapping, and jumping
into the air, as Icarus did.
An alternative methodology is to try to understand the principles
of flying without restricting oneself to the natural occurrences of
flying. This typically involves the construction of artifacts that
embody the hypothesized principles, even if they do not behave like
flying animals in any way except flying. This second method has provided
both useful tools – airplanes – and a better understanding of the
principles underlying flying, namely aerodynamics .
Birds are still much better at flying though forests.

AI takes an approach analogous to that of aerodynamics.
AI researchers are
interested in testing general hypotheses about the nature of
intelligence by building machines that are intelligent and that do not
necessarily mimic humans or organizations. This also offers an approach to
the question, “Can computers really think?” by considering the
analogous question, “Can airplanes really fly?”

AI is intimately linked with the discipline
of computer science
because the study of computation is central to AI. It is essential to
understand algorithms, data structures, and combinatorial complexity
to build intelligent machines. It is also surprising how much
of computer science started as a spinoff from AI, from timesharing
to computer algebra systems.

Finally, AI can be seen as coming under the umbrella of cognitive science . Cognitive science links various
disciplines that study cognition and reasoning, from psychology to
linguistics to anthropology to neuroscience. AI distinguishes itself
within cognitive science by providing tools to build intelligence
rather than just studying the external behavior of intelligent agents or dissecting the inner workings of intelligent systems.

Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational Agents, Poole
& Mackworth

Copyright &copy; 2023, David L. Poole and Alan K. Mackworth .
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License .
