Title: Artificial Intelligence 3E
URL: https://artint.info/3e/html/ArtInt3e.Ch1.S6.html
Snapshot Type: sanitized text

David L. Poole & Alan K. Mackworth

Artificial
Intelligence 3E

foundations of computational agents

- Home

- Index

- Contents

1.6 Designing Agents

Artificial agents are designed for particular tasks. Researchers have not yet
got to the stage of designing an intelligent agent for the task of surviving
and reproducing in a complex natural environment.

1.6.1 Simplifying Environments and Simplifying Agents

It is important to distinguish between the knowledge in the mind of an agent
and the knowledge in the mind of the designer of the agent. Consider the extreme cases:

•

At one extreme is a highly specialized agent that
works well in the environment for which it was designed, but is
helpless outside of this niche. The designer
may have done considerable work in building the agent, but the
agent can be extremely specialized to operate well. An example is a traditional
thermostat. It may be difficult to design a thermostat so that it
turns on and off at exactly the right temperatures, but the thermostat
itself does not have to do much computation. Another example is a
car-painting robot that always paints the same parts in an automobile factory. There may be much design
time or offline
computation to get it to work perfectly, but the painting robot can paint parts with
little online computation; it senses that there is a part in
position, but then it carries out its predefined actions. These very
specialized agents do not adapt well to different environments or to
changing goals. The painting robot would not notice if a different
sort of part were present and, even if it did, it would not know what to do
with it. It would have to be redesigned or reprogrammed to paint different parts or
to change into a sanding machine or a dog-washing machine.

•

At the other extreme is a very flexible agent that can survive
in arbitrary environments and accept new tasks at run time. Simple
biological agents such as insects
can adapt to complex changing environments, but they cannot carry out
arbitrary tasks. Designing an agent that can adapt to complex environments and
changing goals is a major challenge. The agent
will know much more about the particulars of a situation than the
designer. Even biology has not produced many such agents. Humans
may be the only extant example, but even humans need time to adapt to new
environments.

Even if the flexible agent is our ultimate dream, researchers have to
reach this goal via more mundane goals. Rather than building a
universal agent, which can adapt to any environment and solve any
task, researchers have been restricted to particular agents for particular environmental
niches. The designer can exploit the structure of the particular niche and the agent does not have to reason about other
possibilities.

Two broad strategies have been pursued in building agents:

•

The first is to simplify environments and build complex
reasoning systems for these simple environments. For example, factory
robots can do sophisticated tasks in the engineered environment of a
factory, but they may be hopeless in a natural environment.
Much of the
complexity of the task can be reduced by simplifying the
environment. This is also important for building practical systems because
many environments can be engineered to make them simpler for agents.

•

The second strategy is to build simple agents in natural environments.
This is inspired by seeing how insects can survive in
complex environments even though they have very limited reasoning
abilities. Modern language systems can predict the probability of the
next word in an arbitrary text, but this does not mean they can be
used for decision making.
Researchers then make the agents have more reasoning abilities
as their tasks become more complicated.

One of the advantages of simplifying environments is that it may
enable us to prove properties of agents or to optimize agents for
particular situations. Proving properties or optimization typically requires a model of the agent and its
environment. The agent may do a little or a lot of reasoning, but an
observer or designer of the agent may be able to reason about the
agent and the environment. For example, the designer may be able to
prove whether the agent can achieve a goal, whether it can avoid getting into
situations that may be bad for the agent ( safety ), whether it
can avoid getting stuck somewhere ( liveness ), or whether it will eventually get
around to each of the things it should do ( fairness ). Of course, the
proof is only as good as the model.

The advantage of building agents for complex environments
is that these are the types of environments in which humans live and
where agents could be useful.

Even natural environments can be abstracted into simpler
environments. For example, for an autonomous car driving on public
roads the environment can be
conceptually simplified so that
everything is either a road, another car, or something to be
avoided. Although autonomous cars have sophisticated sensors, they only have limited actions available, namely steering,
accelerating, and braking.

Fortunately, research along both lines, and between these extremes, is
being carried out. In the first case, researchers start with simple
environments and make the environments more complex. In the second
case, researchers increase the complexity of the behaviors that the agents
can carry out.

1.6.2 Tasks

One way that AI representations differ from computer programs in
traditional languages is that an AI representation typically specifies
what needs to be computed, not how it is to be
computed. You might specify that the agent should find the
most likely disease a patient has, or specify that a
robot should get coffee, but not give detailed instructions on how to
do these things. Much AI reasoning involves searching
through the space of possibilities to determine how to complete a task.

Typically, a task is only given informally, such as “deliver
parcels promptly when they arrive” or “fix whatever is wrong with
the electrical system of the home.”

Figure 1.9: The role of representations in solving tasks

The general framework for solving tasks by computer is given in
Figure 1.9 . To solve a task, the designer of a system must:

•

determine what constitutes a solution

•

represent the task in a way a computer can reason about

•

use the computer to compute an output; either answers
presented to a user or actions to be carried out in
the environment

•

interpret the output as a solution
to the task.

In AI, knowledge is long-term representation of a domain whereas belief is about the
immediate environment, for example where the agent is and where other
object are.
In
philosophy, knowledge is usually defined as justified true
belief , but in AI the term is used more generally to be any
relatively stable information, as opposed to belief, which is
more transitory information. The reason for this terminology is that
it is difficult for an agent to determine truth, and “justified” is
subjective. Knowledge in AI can be represented in terms of logic,
neural networks, or probabilistic models, but belief is typically
represented as a distribution over the states.

A representation of some piece of
knowledge is the particular data structures used to encode the knowledge so it can be
reasoned with.

The form of representation – what is represented – is a compromise among many competing objectives.
A representation should be:

•

rich enough to express the knowledge needed to solve the task

•

as close to a natural specification of the task as possible

•

amenable to efficient computation

•

able to be acquired from people, data, and past experiences.

Being as close to a natural specification of the task as possible means should be compact,
natural, and maintainable. It should be easy to see the relationship
between the representation and the domain being represented, so that
it is easy to determine whether the knowledge represented is correct; a
small change in the task should result in a small change in the representation
of the task. There is an active debate about how much of the internal structure of reasoning should be
explainable; the field of explainable AI is about
how to make more aspects of the decision making amenable to being explained
to a person.

Efficient computation enables the
agent to act quickly enough to be effective.
A tractable algorithm is one with reasonable
asymptotic complexity , often meaning the computation time is polynomial in the
input size , however often linear complexity is too slow.
To ensure this, representations exploit features
of the task for computational gain and trade off accuracy and computation
time.

Many different representation languages have been
designed. Many of these start with some of these objectives and are then
expanded to include the other objectives. For example, some
are designed for learning, perhaps inspired by neurons, and then expanded to
allow richer task-solving and inference abilities. Some
representation languages are
designed with expressiveness in mind, and then inference and learning
are added on. Some language designers focus on tractability and enhance
richness,
naturalness, and the ability to be acquired.

1.6.3 Defining a Solution

Given an informal description of a task, before even
considering a computer, an agent designer should determine what would constitute a
solution. This question arises not only in AI but in any software
design. Much of software engineering
involves refining the specification of the task.

Tasks are typically not well specified. Not only is there usually
much left unspecified, but also the unspecified parts cannot be filled in
arbitrarily. For example,
if a user asks a trading agent to find out all
the information about resorts that may have unsanitary food practices, they
do not want the agent to return all the information about all resorts,
even though all of the information requested is in
the result. However, if the trading agent does not have complete knowledge
about the resorts, returning all of the information may be the only way
for it to guarantee that all of the requested
information is there. Similarly, one does not want a delivery robot,
when asked to take all of the trash to the garbage can, to take
everything to the garbage can, even though this may be the only way to
guarantee that all of the trash has been taken. Much work in AI is
motivated by commonsense reasoning ; the computer should
be able to reach commonsense
conclusions about the unstated
assumptions.

Given a well-defined task, the next issue is whether it matters if
the answer returned is incorrect or incomplete. For example, if the specification asks
for all instances, does it matter if some are missing? Does it matter
if there are some extra instances? Often a person does not want just any solution
but the best solution according to some criteria. There are four
common classes of solutions:

Optimal solution

An optimal solution to
a task is one that is the best solution according to
some measure of solution quality. This measure is typically specified
as an ordinal , where only the order matters. In some
situations a cardinal measure, where the
relative magnitudes also matter, is used.
For example, a robot may need to take out as much trash as possible; the more trash it
can take out, the better. In a more complex example, you may want the
delivery robot to take as much of the trash as possible to the garbage can, minimizing
the distance traveled, and explicitly specify a trade-off between the effort
required and the proportion of the trash taken out. There are also
costs associated with making mistakes and throwing out items that are
not trash. It may be better
to miss some trash than to waste too much time. One general measure of
desirability that interacts with probability is
utility .

Satisficing solution

Often an agent does not need
the best solution to a task but just needs some solution. A
satisficing solution is one that is good enough according to some description of which solutions are
adequate. For example, a person may tell a robot that it must take all
of the trash out, or tell it to take out three items of trash.

Approximately optimal solution

One of the advantages of a cardinal measure of success is that it
allows for approximations.
An approximately optimal solution
is one whose measure of quality is close to the best that
could theoretically be obtained. Typically, agents do not need optimal
solutions to tasks; they only need to get close enough. For example,
the robot may not need to travel the optimal distance to take out the trash
but may only need to be within, say, 10 % of the optimal distance.
Some approximation algorithms guarantee that a
solution is within some range of optimal, but for some algorithms no
guarantees are available.

For some tasks, it is much easier computationally to get an
approximately optimal solution than to get an optimal solution. However, for
other tasks, it is just as difficult to find an approximately optimal
solution that is guaranteed to be within some bounds of optimal as it is to find
an optimal solution.

Probable solution

A probable solution
is one that, even though it may not actually be a solution to the
task, is likely to be a solution. This is one way to approximate,
in a precise manner, a satisficing solution. For example, in the case
where the delivery robot could drop the trash or fail to pick it up
when it attempts to, you may need the robot to be 80% sure that it
has picked up three items of trash. Often you want to distinguish
a false-positive error (positive answers that are not correct) from
a false-negative error (negative answers that are correct).
Some applications are much more tolerant of one of these types of errors than
the other.

These categories are not exclusive. A form of learning known as
probably approximately correct (PAC)
learning considers probably learning an approximately correct concept.

1.6.4 Representations

Once you have some requirements on the nature of a solution, you must
represent the task so a computer can solve it.

Computers and human minds are examples of physical symbol systems . A symbol is a meaningful pattern that
can be manipulated. Examples of symbols are written words, sentences, gestures,
marks on paper, or sequences of bits. A symbol system creates,
copies, modifies, and destroys symbols. Essentially, a symbol is one of
the patterns manipulated as a unit by a symbol
system.
The term “physical” is used, because symbols in a physical symbol system
are physical objects that are part of the real world, even though they
may be internal to computers and brains. They may also need to physically affect
action or motor control.

The physical symbol system
hypothesis of
Newell and Simon [ 1976 ] is that:

A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means for
general intelligent action.

This is a strong hypothesis. It means that any intelligent agent is necessarily a physical symbol system. It also means that a physical symbol
system is all that is needed for intelligent action; there is no magic
or as-yet-to-be-discovered quantum phenomenon required. It does not imply
that a physical symbol system does not need a body to sense and act
in the world.

One aspect of this hypothesis is particularly controversial, namely whether
symbols are needed at all levels. For example, consider recognizing a “cat”
in a picture. At the top level is the symbol for a cat. At the bottom
level are pixels from a camera. There are many intermediate levels
that, for example, combine pixels to form lines and textures. These
intermediate features are learned from data, and are not learned with the
constraint that they are interpretable. Although
some people have tried to interpret them, it is reasonable to say that
these are not symbols. However, at a high level, they are either
trained to be symbols (e.g., by learning a mapping between pixels and
symbols, such as cat ) or can be interpreted as symbols.

An agent can use a physical symbol system to model the world. A
model of a world is a representation of an agent’s beliefs about
what is true in the world or how the world changes. The world
does not have to be modeled at the most detailed level to be
useful. All models are abstractions ; they represent only part of the
world and leave out many of the details. An agent can have a very simplistic model of the world, or it can
have a very detailed model of the world. The level of
abstraction provides a partial ordering of abstraction. A
lower-level abstraction includes more details than a higher-level abstraction.
An agent can
have multiple, even contradictory, models of the world. Models are judged not by
whether they are correct, but by whether they are useful.

Example 1.34 .

A delivery robot can model the environment at a high level
of abstraction in terms of rooms, corridors, doors, and obstacles, ignoring distances, its size, the steering
angles needed, the slippage of the wheels, the weight of parcels,
the details of obstacles, the political situation in Canada, and
virtually everything else. The robot could model the environment at lower levels of abstraction by taking
some of these details into account. Some of these details may be irrelevant for
the successful implementation of the robot, but some may be crucial for
the robot to succeed. For example, in some situations the size of the
robot and the steering angles may be crucial for not getting stuck
around a particular corner. In other situations, if the robot stays close to
the center of the corridor, it may not need to model its width or the steering angles.

Choosing an appropriate level of abstraction is difficult for the
following reasons:

•

A high-level description is easier for a human to specify and understand.

•

A low-level description can be more accurate and more
predictive. Often, high-level descriptions abstract away details that
may be important for actually solving the task.

•

The lower the level, the more difficult it is to reason with.
This is because a solution at a lower level of detail involves more
steps and many more possible courses of action exist from which to choose.

•

An agent may not know the information needed for a low-level
description. For example, the delivery robot may not know what
obstacles it will encounter or how slippery the floor will be at the
time that it must decide what to do.

It is often a good idea to model an environment at multiple levels of
abstraction. This issue is discussed further in Section 2.2 .

Biological systems, and computers, can be described at multiple
levels of abstraction. At successively lower levels of animals are the neuronal
level, the biochemical level (what chemicals and what electrical
potentials are being transmitted), the chemical level (what chemical
reactions are being carried out), and the level of physics (in terms of
forces on atoms and quantum phenomena). What levels above the
neuronal level are needed to account for intelligence is still an open
question. These levels of description are echoed in the hierarchical
structure of science itself, where scientists are divided
into physicists, chemists, biologists, psychologists, anthropologists,
and so on. Although no level of description is more important than any other,
it is plausible that you do not have to emulate every level of a human to build an
AI agent but rather you can emulate the higher
levels and build them on the foundation of modern computers. This conjecture is part
of what AI studies.

The following are two levels that seem to be common to both biological and computational
entities:

•

The knowledge level is
the level of abstraction that considers what an agent knows and believes and what
its goals are. The knowledge level considers what an agent knows, but
not how it reasons. For example, the delivery
agent’s behavior can be described in terms of whether it knows that a parcel has
arrived or not and whether it knows where a particular person is or
not. Both human and robotic agents are describable at the knowledge level. At
this level, you do not specify how the solution will be computed or
even which of the many possible strategies available to the agent will
be used.

•

The symbol level is a level of description of
an agent in terms of the reasoning it does. To
implement the knowledge level, an agent manipulates symbols to produce answers.
Many cognitive science experiments are designed to determine what
symbol manipulation occurs during reasoning. Whereas the
knowledge level is about
what the agent believes about the external world and what its goals
are in terms of the outside world, the symbol level is about what
goes on inside an agent to reason about the external world.

Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational Agents, Poole
& Mackworth

Copyright &copy; 2023, David L. Poole and Alan K. Mackworth .
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License .
