Title: Thresholds and the confusion matrix
URL: https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/classification/thresholding
Snapshot Type: sanitized text

Products

Machine Learning

ML Concepts

Crash Course

Send feedback

Thresholds and the confusion matrix

Stay organized with collections

Save and categorize content based on your preferences.

Let's say you have a logistic regression model for spam-email detection that
predicts a value between 0 and 1, representing the probability that a given
email is spam. A prediction of 0.50 signifies a 50% likelihood that the email is
spam, a prediction of 0.75 signifies a 75% likelihood that the email is spam,
and so on.

You'd like to deploy this model in an email application to filter spam into
a separate mail folder. But to do so, you need to convert the model's raw
numerical output (e.g.,
0.75
) into one of two categories: "spam" or "not
spam."

To make this conversion, you choose a threshold probability, called a
classification threshold .
Examples with a probability above the threshold value are then assigned
to the positive class ,
the class you are testing for (here,
spam
). Examples with a lower
probability are assigned to the negative class ,
the alternative class (here,
not spam
).

Click here for more details on the classification threshold.

You may be wondering: what happens if the predicted score is equal to
the classification threshold (for instance, a score of 0.5 where
the classification threshold is also 0.5)? Handling for this case
depends on the particular implementation chosen for the classification
model. The Keras
library predicts the negative class if the score and threshold
are equal, but other tools/frameworks may handle this case
differently.

Suppose the model scores one email as 0.99, predicting
that email has a 99% chance of being spam, and another email as
0.51, predicting it has a 51% chance of being spam. If you set the
classification threshold to 0.5, the model will classify both emails as
spam. If you set the threshold to 0.95, only the email scoring 0.99 will
be classified as spam.

While 0.5 might seem like an intuitive threshold, it's not a good idea if the
cost of one type of wrong classification is greater than the other, or if the
classes are imbalanced. If only 0.01% of emails are spam, or if misfiling
legitimate emails is worse than letting spam into the inbox,
labeling anything the model considers at least 50% likely to be spam
as spam produces undesirable results.

Confusion matrix

The probability score is not reality, or
ground truth .
There are four possible outcomes for each output from a binary classifier.
For the spam classifier example, if you lay out the ground truth as columns
and the model's prediction as rows, the following table, called a
confusion matrix , is the
result:

Actual positive
Actual negative

Predicted positive
True positive (TP) : A spam
email correctly classified as a spam email. These are the spam messages
automatically sent to the spam folder.

False positive (FP) : A not-spam email misclassified as
spam. These are the legitimate emails that
wind up in the spam folder.

Predicted negative
False
negative (FN) : A spam email misclassified as not-spam. These are spam
emails that aren't
caught by the spam filter and make their way into the inbox.
True negative (TN) : A
not-spam email correctly classified as not-spam.
These are the legitimate emails that are sent
directly to the inbox.

Notice that the total in each row gives all predicted positives (TP + FP) and
all predicted negatives (FN + TN), regardless of validity. The total in each
column, meanwhile, gives all real positives (TP + FN) and all real negatives
(FP + TN) regardless of model classification.

When the total of actual positives is not close to the total of actual
negatives, the dataset is
imbalanced . An instance
of an imbalanced dataset might be a set of thousands of photos of clouds, where
the rare cloud type you are interested in, say, volutus clouds, only appears
a few times.

Effect of threshold on true and false positives and negatives

Different thresholds usually result in different numbers of true and false
positives and true and false negatives. The following video explains why this is
the case.

Try changing the threshold yourself.

This widget includes three toy datasets:

- Separated , where positive examples and negative examples are generally
well differentiated, with most positive examples having higher scores than
negative examples.

- Unseparated , where many positive examples have lower scores than
negative examples, and many negative examples have higher scores than
positive examples.

- Imbalanced , containing only a few examples of the positive class.

Check your understanding

1. Imagine a phishing or malware classification model where
phishing and malware websites are in the class labeled 1 (true) and
harmless websites are in the class labeled 0 (false). This model
mistakenly classifies a legitimate website as malware. What is this called?

A false positive

A negative example (legitimate site) has been wrongly
classified as a positive example (malware site).

A true positive

A true positive would be a malware site correctly
classified as malware.

A false negative

A false negative would be a malware site incorrectly
classified as a legitimate site.

A true negative

A true negative would be a legitimate site correctly
classified as a legitimate site.

2. In general, what happens to the number of false positives when the
classification threshold increases? What about true positives? Experiment
with the slider above.

Both true and false positives decrease.

As the threshold increases, the model will likely predict
fewer positives overall, both true and false. A spam classifier with a
threshold of .9999 will only label an email as spam if it considers the
classification to be at least 99.99% likely, which means it is highly
unlikely to mislabel a legitimate email, but also likely to miss actual
spam email.

Both true and false positives increase.

Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false positives
and true positives?

True positives increase. False positives decrease.

Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false positives
and true positives?

3. In general, what happens to the number of false negatives when the
classification threshold increases? What about true negatives? Experiment
with the slider above.

Both true and false negatives increase.

As the threshold increases, the model will likely predict
more negatives overall, both true and false. At a very high threshold,
almost all emails, both spam and not-spam, will be classified as not-spam.

Both true and false negatives decrease.

Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false negatives
and true negatives?

True negatives increase. False negatives decrease.

Using the slider above, try setting the threshold to 0.1,
then dragging it to 0.9. What happens to the number of false negatives
and true negatives?

Help Center

arrow_back

Introduction (3 mins)

Accuracy, recall, precision, and related metrics (15 min)

arrow_forward

Send feedback

Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License , and code samples are licensed under the Apache 2.0 License . For details, see the Google Developers Site Policies . Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Last updated 2026-01-12 UTC.

Need to tell us more?

[[["Easy to understand","easyToUnderstand","thumb-up"],["Solved my problem","solvedMyProblem","thumb-up"],["Other","otherUp","thumb-up"]],[["Missing the information I need","missingTheInformationINeed","thumb-down"],["Too complicated / too many steps","tooComplicatedTooManySteps","thumb-down"],["Out of date","outOfDate","thumb-down"],["Samples / code issue","samplesCodeIssue","thumb-down"],["Other","otherDown","thumb-down"]],["Last updated 2026-01-12 UTC."],[],[]]
